---
title: Transient Response of RC Circuit
---

# Objective

The objective of this Lab activity is to study the transient response of
a series RC circuit and understand the time constant concept using pulse
waveforms.

# Notes

In this tutorials we use the terminology taken from the user manual when
referring to the connections to the Red Pitaya STEMlab board
[hardware](http://redpitaya.readthedocs.io/en/latest/doc/developerGuide/125-10/top.html).
Oscilloscope & Signal generator application is used for generating and
observing signals on the circuit.

# Background

In this lab activity you will apply a pulse waveform to the RC circuit
to analyses the transient response of the circuit. The pulse-width
relative to a circuit\'s time constant determines how it is affected by
an RC circuit.

Time Constant (t): A measure of time required for certain changes in
voltages and currents in RC and RL circuits. Generally, when the elapsed
time exceeds five time constants (5t) after switching has occurred, the
currents and voltages have reached their final value, which is also
called steady-state response.

The time constant of an RC circuit is the product of equivalent
capacitance and the Thévenin resistance as viewed from the terminals of
the equivalent capacitor.

$$t = R \cdot C$$

A Pulse is a voltage or current that changes from one level to another
and back again. If a waveform\'s high time equals its low time it is
called a square wave. The length of each cycle of a pulse is its period
(T).

The pulse width (tp) of an ideal square wave is equal to half the time
period.

The relation between pulse width and frequency is then given by,

$$f = \frac{1}{2t_p}$$

![](img/Activity_06_Fig_01.png)

Figure 1: Series RC circuit.

From Kirchhoff\'s laws, it can be shown that the charging voltage
V~C~(t) across the capacitor is given by:

$$V_C (t) = V( 1- e^{- \frac{t}{RC}})  ;t >= 0$$

where, V is the applied source voltage to the circuit for t = 0. RC = t
is the time constant. The response curve is increasing and is shown in
figure 2.

![](img/Activity_06_Fig_02.png)

Figure 2: Capacitor charging for Series RC circuit to a step input with
time axis normalized by t

The discharge voltage for the capacitor is given by:

$$V_C (t) = V_o e^{-\frac{t}{RC}} ;t >= 0$$

Where V~0~ is the initial voltage stored in capacitor at t = 0, and RC =
t is time constant. The response curve is a decaying exponential as
shown in figure 3.

![](img/Activity_06_Fig_03.png)

Figure 3: Capacitor Discharging for Series RC circuit

# Materials

Red Pitaya STEMlab 125-14 or STEMlab 125-10

Resistors:

:   2.2 KΩ, 10 KΩ

Capacitors:

:   1 µF, 0.01 µF

# Procedure

1.  Set up the circuit shown in figure 4 on your solderless breadboard
    with the component values R~1~= 2.2 KΩ and C~1~= 1 µF.

    > -Connect the Oscilloscope & Signal generator probes as is shown in
    > figure 5. -Set the oscilloscope attenuation to x1.

![](img/Activity_06_Fig_04.png)

Figure 4. Breadboard diagram of RC circuit R~1~= 2.2 KΩ and C~1~= 1 µF.

![](img/Activity_06_Fig_05.png)

Figure 5. Breadboard RC circuit R~1~= 2.2 KΩ and C~1~= 1 µF.

Start the Oscilloscope & Signal Generator application.

2\. In the OUT1 settings menu set DC offset value to 0.5 and Amplitude
value to 0.5V to apply a 1Vp-p square wave centered on 0.5 V as the
input voltage to the circuit. From the waveform menu select SQUARE
signal, deselect SHOW button and select enable. On the left bottom of
the screen be sure that IN1 V/div and IN2 V/div are both set to
200mV/div (You can set V/div by selecting the desired channel and using
vertical +/- controls) In the IN1 and IN2 settings menu set the value of
Vertical Offset to -500mV For the stable acquisition set the trigger
level in TRIGGER menu to 0.5V and select NORMAL.

3.  Observe the response of the circuit for the following three cases
    and record the results.

```{=html}
<!-- -->
```
a.  Pulse width larger than 5t (for example 15t) : Set the frequency of
    OUT1 output such that the capacitor has enough time to fully charge
    and discharge during each cycle of the square wave. So let the pulse
    width be 15t and set the frequency according to equation (2). The
    value you have found should be approximately 15 Hz.

Notice: Calculate frequency of OUT1 so that the pulse width of OUT1 is
equal to desired value of x\*t by equation (2):

$$f_out = \frac{1}{2 \cdot x \cdot t}$$

For example: If we want to have pulse width of your OUT1 square signal
equals 5\*t (t - time constant of RC circuit t = R \* C)

$$t = R \cdot C = 2.2E3 \cdot 1E-6 = 2.2E-3$$

$$f_out  = \frac{1}{2 \cdot 5 \cdot 2.2E-3} = 45Hz$$

Determine the time constant from the waveforms obtained on the screen if
you can. If you cannot obtain the time constant easily, explain possible
reasons.

For determining time constant use "CURSOR" option. Open CURSOR menu and
select all four cursors: X1, X2, Y1, Y2. For Y cursor select IN2 for
source. Control/Move cursors using an left click+hold mouse control on
the cursor marker(an arrow on the end of the cursor line).

Adjust the **time base** using **horizontal +/-** control until you have
at approximately two cycles of the square wave on the display grid.

![](img/Activity_06_Fig_06.png)

Figure 6. Oscilloscope interface and signals IN1 and IN2 on RC circuit

In order to set cursors more accurately adjust the time base until you
have approximately one or half of the cycle of the square wave on the
display grid.

![](img/Activity_06_Fig_07.png)

Figure 7: Measuring the time constant t for OUT1 pulse width \>\> 5t .

Set cursor as is shown in figure 2 readout delta values and calculate
time constant.

b.  Pulse width = 5t : Set the frequency of OUT1 such that the pulse
    width = 5t (this should be approximately 45 Hz). Since the pulse
    width is 5t, the capacitor should just be able to fully charge and
    discharge during each pulse cycle. Using cursor tool determine t.

![](img/Activity_06_Fig_08.png)

Figure 8: Measuring the time constant t for OUT1 pulse width = 5t

c.  Pulse width less than 5t (for example 1t): In this case the
    capacitor does not have time to charge significantly before it is
    switched to discharge, and vice versa. Let the pulse width be only
    1.0t in this case and set the frequency accordingly (this should be
    approximately 240 Hz).

![](img/Activity_06_Fig_09.png)

Figure 9: Measuring the time constant t for OUT1 pulse width = 1t

4\. Repeat the procedure using R~1~= 10 KΩ and C~1~= 0.01 µF and record
the measurements. Questions:

> 1.  Calculate the time constant using equation (1) and compare it to
>     the measured value from 3a. Repeat this for other set of R and C
>     values.
> 2.  Discuss the effects of changing component values.
