---
title: Transient Response of an RL Circuit
---

# Objective

The objective of this Lab activity is to study the transient response of
inductor circuits using a series RL configuration and understand the
time constant concept.

# Notes

In this tutorials we use the terminology taken from the user manual when
referring to the connections to the Red Pitaya STEMlab board
[hardware](http://redpitaya.readthedocs.io/en/latest/doc/developerGuide/125-10/top.html).
Oscilloscope & Signal generator application is used for generating and
observing signals on the circuit.

# Background

This lab activity is similar to the RC Lab activity 5, except that the
capacitor is replaced by an inductor. In this experiment, you will apply
a square waveform to the RL circuit to analyze the transient response of
the circuit. The pulse width relative to the circuit\'s time constant
determines how it is affected by the RL circuit.

Time Constant (t): It is a measure of time required for certain changes
in voltages and currents in RC and RL circuits. Generally, when the
elapsed time exceeds five time constants (5t) after switching has
occurred, the currents and voltages have reached their final value,
which is also called steady-state response.

The time constant of an RL circuit is the equivalent inductance divided
by the Thévenin resistance as viewed from the terminals of the
equivalent inductor.

$$f=\frac{L}{R}$$

A Pulse is a voltage or current that changes from one level to another
and back again. If a waveform\'s high time equals its low time, it is
called a square wave. The length of each cycle of a pulse train is its
period (T). The pulse width (tp) of an ideal square wave is equal to
half the time period.

The relation between pulse width and frequency for the square wave is
given by:

$$f=\frac{1}{2t_p}$$

![](img/Activity_07_Fig_01.png)

Figure 1: Series RL circuit

In an R-L circuit, voltage across the inductor decreases with time while
in the RC circuit the voltage across the capacitor increased with time.
Thus, current in an RL circuit has the same form as voltage in an RC
circuit: they both rise to their final value exponentially.

The expression for the current in the Inductor is given by:

$$I_L(t) = RV( 1 - e^{-\frac{R}{L}t} )  ; t >= 0$$

where, V is the applied source voltage to the circuit for t = 0. The
response curve is increasing and is shown in figure 2.

![](img/Activity_07_Fig_02.png)

Figure 2: Current in Inductor increasing in a Series RL circuit.

(Time axis normalized by t)

The expression for the current decay across the Inductor is given by:

$$I_L(t) = I_0 e^{- \frac{R}{L}t} ; t >= 0$$

where, I :sub: [0]{.title-ref} is the initial current stored in the
inductor at t = 0 L/R = t is time constant.

The response curve is a decaying exponential and is shown in figure 3.

![](img/Activity_07_Fig_03.png)

Since it is not possible to directly measure the current through the
Inductor ( current supplied by driving source OUT1 ) with the STEMlab,
we will measure output voltage across the Resistor in series with the
Inductor. The resistor waveform will be same shape as the inductor
current since from Ohm's law we know that current and voltage through
resistor are related with V ~R~ = I ~R~ \* R. Our circuit has two
elements (Resistor and Inductor) in series which means same current is
flowing through both components I ~circuit~ = I ~L~ = I ~R~ We know that
signal on input IN2 is voltage across resistor V ~R~ which is in fact
current through inductor multiplied by resistance R.

$$IN2 = R \cdot I_L$$

From that it follows that when observing signal IN2 we are observing
current through inductor, and only thing we need to have in mind is
scaling factor - resistance R.

From the waveforms on the scope, we should be able to measure the time
constant t which should be equal to t = L / R ~total~ . Here, R ~total~
is the total resistance and can be calculated from R ~total~ = R
~inductance~ + R. R inductance is the measured value of inductor
resistance and can be measured by using Multimeter prior to running the
experiment. (Measure R inductance same as you would measure normal
resistor.)

# Materials

Red Pitaya STEMlab 125-14 or STEMlab 125-10

Resistor 220 Ω

Inductor 20 mH ( 2x10 mH in series )

# Procedure

1.  Measure the combined inductor and resistor resistance R ~total~ by
    using a Multimeter.

![](img/Activity_07_Fig_04.png)

2\. Set up the circuit shown in figure 5 on your solderless breadboard
with the component values R ~1~ = 220 Ω and L ~1~ = 20mH. -Connect the
Oscilloscope & Signal generator probes as is shown in Figure 5. -Set the
oscilloscope attenuation to x1.

Figure 5: Experiment Set-Up

Start the Oscilloscope & Signal Generator application.

3\. In the OUT1 settings menu set DC offset value to 0.5 and Amplitude
value to 0.5V to apply a 1Vp-p square wave centered on 0.5 V as the
input voltage to the circuit. From the waveform menu select SQUARE
signal, deselect SHOW button and select enable. On the left bottom of
the screen be sure that IN1 V/div and IN2 V/div are both set to
200mV/div (You can set V/div by selecting the desired channel and using
vertical +/- controls) In the IN1 and IN2 settings menu set the value of
Vertical Offset to -500mV For the stable acquisition set the trigger
level in TRIGGER menu to 0.5V and select NORMAL.

Calculate the applied frequency using equation (2) for tp = 5t . In the
OUT1 settings menu set frequency according to the calculation.

Adjust the time base using horizontal +/- control until you have at
approximately two cycles of the square wave on the display grid.

4.  The VR (IN2) waveform has the same shape as IL(t) waveform. From VR
    waveform measure time constant t and compare with the one that you
    calculated from L/R ~total~.

::: hint
::: title
Hint
:::

When measuring RC transient effect we used cursor to find 0.63\*Vc, here
we are interested in current I ~L~ = IN2/R and not voltage. According to
the Figure 3 you should put cursor Y1 to the maximum value of IN2 and
cursor Y2 to the 0.37\*IN2. Set the X1 and X2 cursors to the crossing
points and measure time constant.
:::

For determining time constant use "CURSOR" option. Open CURSOR menu and
select all four cursors: X1,X2,Y1,Y2. For Y cursor select IN2 for
source. Control/Move cursors using an left click+hold mouse control on
the cursor marker(an arrow on the end of the cursor line).

In order to set cursors more accurately adjust the time base until you
have approximately one or half of the cycle of the square wave on the
display grid.

5.  Observe the response of the circuit and record the results again for
    tp = 25t, and tp = 0.5t.

# Questions

-   Include plots of IL and VR for different tp values given above in
    Procedure 4.
-   A Capacitor stores charge. What do you think an Inductor stores?
    Answer in brief.
