---
title: Measuring a Loudspeaker Impedance Profile
---

# Objective

The objective of this experiment is to measure the impedance profile and
the resonate frequency of a permanent magnet loudspeaker.

# Notes

In this tutorials we use the terminology taken from the user manual when
referring to the connections to the Red Pitaya STEMlab board
[hardware](http://redpitaya.readthedocs.io/en/latest/index.html).
[Impedance](http://redpitaya.readthedocs.io/en/latest/doc/appsFeatures/marketplace/marketplace.html#impedance-analyzer)
[analyzer](http://redpitaya.readthedocs.io/en/latest/doc/appsFeatures/marketplace/marketplace.html#impedance-analyzer)
application is used to measure RLC circuit impedane $Z(f)$. **Here we
use Impedance analyzer application without LCR meter frontend as
described**
[HERE](http://redpitaya.readthedocs.io/en/latest/doc/appsFeatures/marketplace/marketplace.html#impedance-analyzer).
The Impedance analyzer application enables measurements of Impedance,
Phase and other parameters of the selected DUT (Device Under Test).
Measurements can be performed in the Frequency sweep mode with 1Hz
frequency resolution or in the Measurements sweep mode with the desired
number of measurements at constant frequency. The selectable frequency
range is from 1Hz to 60MHz, although the recommended frequency range is
up to 1MHz. The impedance range is from 0.1 Ohm to 10 Mohm. When using
the Impedance analyzer application with the LCR Extension module, insert
0 in the shunt resistor field.

# Background

The chief electrical characteristic of a dynamic loudspeaker is its
electrical impedance as a function of frequency. It can be visualized by
plotting it as a graph, called the impedance curve. The most common type
of loudspeaker is an electro-mechanical transducer using a voice coil
connected to a diaphragm or cone. The voice coil in moving coil
loudspeakers is suspended in a magnetic field provided by a permanent
magnet. As electric current flows through the voice coil, from an audio
amplifier, the electro-magnetic field created by the current in the coil
reacts against the permanent magnet\'s fixed field and moves the voice
coil (also the cone). Alternating current will move the cone back and
forth. The movement of the cone vibrates the air producing the sound.

The moving system of the loudspeaker, including the cone, cone
suspension, spider and the voice coil, has a certain mass and
compliance. This is most commonly modeled as a simple mass suspended by
a spring that has a certain resonant frequency at which the system will
vibrate most freely.

This frequency is known as the "free-space resonance" of the speaker and
is designated by $F_S$. At this frequency, since the voice coil is
vibrating with the maximum peak-to-peak amplitude and velocity, the
back-emf generated by coil motion in a magnetic field is also at its
maximum. This causes the effective electrical impedance of the speaker
to be at its maximum at $F_S$, known as $F_{max}$. For frequencies just
below resonance, the impedance rises rapidly as the frequency approaches
$F_S$ and is inductive in nature. At resonance, the impedance is purely
resistive and beyond it, as the impedance drops, it looks capacitive.
The impedance reaches a minimum value, $Z_{min}$, at some frequency
where the behavior is mostly (but not perfectly) resistive over some
range of frequencies. A speaker\'s rated or nominal impedance,
$Z_{nom}$, is derived from this $Z_{min}$ value.

Knowing the resonate frequency and the minimum and maximum impedances
are important when designing cross over filter networks for multiple
driver speakers and the physical enclosure the speakers are mounted in.

# Loudspeaker Impedance Model

To help understand the measurements you are about to make, a simplified
electrical model of a loudspeaker is shown in figure 1.

![](img/Activity_12_Fig_01.png)

Figure 1: Loudspeaker Impedance Model

The circuit in figure 1 has a dc resistance placed in series with a
lossy parallel resonant circuit made up of $L$, $R$, and $C$, which
models the dynamic impedance of the speaker over the frequency range of
interest.

-   $R_{dc}$ is the dc resistance of the loudspeaker as measured with a
    DC ohmmeter. The dc resistance is often referred to as the $DCR$ in
    a speaker/subwoofer data sheet. The dc resistance measurement is
    usually less than the driver\'s nominal impedance $Z_{nom}$.
    $R_{dc}$ is typically less than the specified loudspeaker impedance
    and the novice loudspeaker enthusiast may be fearful that the driver
    amplifier will be overloaded. However, because the inductance $L$ of
    a speaker increases with an increase in frequency, it is unlikely
    that the driver amplifier actually sees the dc resistance as its
    load.
-   $L$ is the voice coil inductance usually measured in milliHenries
    $mH$. Typically, the industry standard is to measure the voice coil
    inductance at $1kHz$. As frequencies increase above $0Hz$, there is
    a rise in impedance above the $R_{dc}$ value. This is because the
    voice coil acts as an inductor. Consequently, the overall impedance
    of a loudspeaker is not a constant impedance, but can be represented
    as a dynamic profile that changes with input frequency as we will
    see when we make measurements. Maximum impedance, $Z_{max}$, of the
    loudspeaker occurs at the resonant frequency, $F_s$, of the
    loudspeaker.
-   $F_s$ is the resonant frequency of a loudspeaker. The impedance of a
    loudspeaker is a maximum at $Z_s$. The resonant frequency is the
    point at which the total mass of the moving parts of the loudspeaker
    become balanced with the force of the speaker suspension when in
    motion. The resonant frequency information is important to prevent
    an enclosure from ringing. In general, the mass of the moving parts
    and the stiffness of the speaker suspension are the key elements
    that affect the resonant frequency. A vented enclosure (bass reflex)
    is tuned to $F_s$ so that the two work in unison. As a rule, a
    speaker with a lower $F_s$ is better for low-frequency reproduction
    than a speaker with a higher $F_s$.
-   $R$ represents the mechanical resistance of a driver\'s suspension
    losses.

# Materials

-   Red Pitaya STEMlab 125-14 or STEMlab 125-10
-   Resistor - $R_{shunt}$: 10 Î©
-   Loudspeaker, it is best if the speaker is one with a cone diameter
    larger than 10cm such that is has a relatively low resonant
    frequency.

# Procedure

1.  First build the circuit shown in the figure 1 and figure 2. The
    loudspeaker can be in an enclosure or not.

![](img/Activity_12_Fig_02.png)

Figure 2: Loudspeaker connections

![](img/Activity_12_Fig_03.png)

Figure 3: STEMlab with shunt resistor Impedance analyzer conection and
Loudspeaker

2.  Start the Impedance analyzer application.

::: note
::: title
Note
:::

Impedance analyzer is community application and it needs to be
downloaded from Application marketplace (bazaar). Click on Application
marketplace icon and select Install for Impedance analyzer.
:::

3.  

    Start Impedance analyzer and:

    :   -   under **Measurement settings menu** set number of steps: 30
        -   under **Measurement settings menu** set $R_{shunt}$ value to
            $10 \Omega$
        -   under **Frequency sweep** set Start frequency to 10Hz and
            End frequency to 10kHz
        -   select **Start measurement**

![](img/Activity_12_Fig_04.png)

Figure 4: Graph of the Loudspeaker impedance magnitude taken with
Impedance analyzer application

4.Plot mesured Phase

:   -   under **Plot settings menu** for **Y-axis** select **P\[deg\]**

![](img/Activity_12_Fig_05.png)

Figure 5: Graph of the Loudspeaker impedance phase taken with Impedance
analyzer application

::: note
::: title
Note
:::

The frequency at which this occurs **(Phase = 0)** is called resonant
frequency.
:::

As is shown in Loudspeaker model (figure 1) resistance $R$ represent the
mechanical resistance of a driver\'s suspension losses. To see an effect
of this modeled resistance $R$ flipover Loudspeaker so its membrane is
facing working bench. With this we will change acousto-mechanical
environment of the speaker which will affect the loudspeaker impedance.

5.  Flipover Loudspeaker as is shown in figure 6 and repeat Impedance
    measurements

![](img/Activity_12_Fig_06.png)

Figure 6: Loudspeaker in different acousto-mechanical environment

As we can see from figure 7 impedance of loudspeaker is now different
and effect of acousto-mechanical environment is clearly visible.

![](img/Activity_12_Fig_07.png)

Figure 7: Loudspeaker impedance at different acousto-mechanical
environment
