---
title: Low Pass and High Pass Filters
---

# Objective

The objective of this Lab activity is to study the characteristics of
passive filters by obtaining the frequency response of low pass RC
filter and high pass RL filter.

# Notes

In this tutorials we use the terminology taken from the user manual when
referring to the connections to the Red Pitaya STEMlab board
[hardware](http://redpitaya.readthedocs.io/en/latest/index.html).

[Oscilloscope](http://redpitaya.readthedocs.io/en/latest/doc/appsFeatures/apps-featured/oscSigGen/osc.html)
&
[Signal](http://redpitaya.readthedocs.io/en/latest/doc/appsFeatures/apps-featured/oscSigGen/osc.html)
[generator](http://redpitaya.readthedocs.io/en/latest/doc/appsFeatures/apps-featured/oscSigGen/osc.html)
application is used for generating and observing signals on the circuit.
[Bode](http://redpitaya.readthedocs.io/en/latest/doc/appsFeatures/apps-featured/bode/bode.html)
analyzer application is used to measure frequency response of Low Pass
and High Pass Filters.

# Background

The impedance of an inductor is proportional to frequency and the
impedance of a capacitor is inversely proportional to frequency. These
characteristics can be used to select or reject certain frequencies of
an input signal. This selection and rejection of frequencies is called
filtering, and a circuit which does this is called a filter.

![Figure 1: Low Pass RC filter.](img/Activity_09_Fig_01.png)

![Figure 2: High Pass RL filter.](img/Activity_09_Fig_02.png)

If a filter passes high frequencies and rejects low frequencies, then it
is a high-pass filter. Conversely, if it passes low frequencies and
rejects high ones, it is a low-pass filter. Filters, like most things,
aren\'t perfect. They don\'t absolutely pass some frequencies and
absolutely reject others. A frequency is considered passed if its
magnitude (voltage amplitude) is within 70% or $1/sqrt(2)$ of the
maximum amplitude passed and rejected otherwise. The 70% frequency is
called corner frequency, roll-off frequency or half-power frequency.

The corner frequencies for RC filter and RL filter are as follows:

For RC filters:

$$f_c = \frac{1}{2 \pi RC}    (1)$$

For RL filters:

$$f_c = \frac{R}{2 \pi L}    (2)$$

Frequency Response: It is a graph of magnitude of the output voltage of
the filter as a function of the frequency. It is generally used to
characterize the range of frequencies in which the filter is designed to
operate within.

![Figure 3: Frequency Response of a typical Low Pass Filter with a
cut-off frequency fc](img/Activity_09_Fig_03.png)

# Materials:

-   Red Pitaya STEMlab 125-14 or STEMlab 125-10
-   Resistors: 1 KΩ
-   Capacitors: 1 µF
-   Inductor: 22 mH

# Procedure

**Low pass RC filter:**

1.  Set up the RC circuit as shown in figure 1 on your solderless
    breadboard, with the component values R1 = 1 KΩ, C1 = 1 µF:

2.  Connect the STEMlab board to your circuit:

    -   Connect the Oscilloscope & Signal generator probes as is shown
        in figure 4.
    -   Set the oscilloscope attenuation to x1.

    ![](img/Activity_09_Fig_04.png)

    Figure 4: Low pass RC filter breadboard circuit

3.  Start the Oscilloscope & Signal Generator application:

    In the OUT1 settings menu set DC offset value to 0.5 and Amplitude
    value to 0.5V to apply a 1Vp-p sine wave centered on 0.5 V as the
    input voltage to the circuit. From the waveform menu select SINE
    signal, deselect SHOW button and select enable. On the left bottom
    of the screen be sure that IN1 V/div and IN2 V/div are both set to
    200mV/div (You can set V/div by selecting the desired channel and
    using vertical +/- controls) In the IN1 and IN2 settings menu set
    the value of Vertical Offset to -500mV For the stable acquisition
    set the trigger level in TRIGGER menu to 0.5V and select NORMAL.

4.  Start with a low frequency, 50 Hz, and measure output voltage IN1
    peak to peak from the scope screen. It should be same as channel
    OUT1 output. Increase the frequency of OUT1 in small increments
    until the peak-peak voltage of channel IN2 is roughly 0.7 times the
    peak to peak voltage for channel IN1. Compute the 70 % of Vp-p and
    obtain the frequency at which this happens on the Oscilloscope.

    This gives the cut-off (roll-off) frequency for the constructed Low
    Pass RC filter. When changing OUT1 frequency adjust time/div using
    horizontal -/+ controls. For peak-peak measurement in the
    measurement menu select "P2P", select IN1, IN2 and press DONE

    ![](img/Activity_09_Fig_05.png)

    Figure 5: Low pass RC filter response at 50Hz

    ![](img/Activity_09_Fig_06.png)

    Figure 6: Low pass RC filter response at 500Hz

**High-Pass RL filter:**

1.  Set up the RL circuit as shown in figure 2 on your solderless
    breadboard, with the component values R1 = 1 KΩ, L1 = 22 mH.

2.  Connect the STEMlab board to your circuit:

    -   Connect the Oscilloscope & Signal generator probes as is shown
        in figure 7.
    -   Set the oscilloscope attenuation to x1.

    ![](img/Activity_09_Fig_07.png)

    Figure 7: High pass RL filter breadboard circuit

3.  Start with a high frequency 50 KHz and measure output voltage IN2
    peak to peak from the scope screen. It should be same as channel IN1
    peak to peak. Lower the frequency of channel OUT1 in small
    increments until the peak-peak voltage of channel IN2 is roughly 0.7
    times the peak to peak voltage for channel A. Compute the 70 % of
    Vp-p and obtain the frequency at which this happens on the
    Oscilloscope. This gives the cut-off (roll-off) frequency for the
    constructed High Pass RL filter.

    ![](img/Activity_09_Fig_08.png)

    Figure 8: High pass RL filter response at 50kHz

    ![](img/Activity_09_Fig_09.png)

    Figure 9: High pass RL filter response at 500Hz

**Frequency response plots with Bode Analayzer**

The Bode analyzer application will make a frequency sweep in such way it
will generate sine signal on OUT1 within frequency range selected by
us(in settings menu). IN1 input signal is directly connected to OUT1
following that IN1=Vin. IN2 is connected on the other side of the RL(RC)
filter and from that IN2=Vout. Bode analyzer application will then for
each frequency step take the ratio of IN1/IN2 and calculate frequency
response.

![Figure 10: Low pass RC filter response taken with Bode analyzer
application](img/Activity_09_Fig_10.png)

![Figure 11: High pass RL filter response taken with Bode analyzer
application](img/Activity_09_Fig_11.png)

**Questions** Calculate the Cut-off frequencies for the RC low pass and
RL high pass filter using equations (1) and (2). Compare the computed
theoretical values to the ones obtained from the experimental
measurements and provide a suitable explanation for any differences.
